---
layout: post
title: Why would you use Backbone.js?
type: beginner
posturl: http://backbonetutorials.com/what-would-you-use-backbone
---

h2. Why do you need Backbone.js?

p. Building single-page web apps or complicated user interfaces will get extremely difficult by simply using "jQuery":http://jquery.com or "MooTools":http://mootools.net.   The problem is standard JavaScript libraries are great at what they do - and without realizing it you can build an entire application without any formal structure.   You will with ease turn your application into a nested pile of jQuery callbacks, all tied to concrete DOM elements.

I shouldn't need to explain why building something without any structure is a bad idea.   Of course you can always invent your own way of implement your own way of structuring your application but you miss out on the benefits of the open source community.



h3. So how does Backbone.js help?

p. Backbone is an incredibly small library for the amount of functionality and structure it gives you.   One can not easily summarize the benefits you will reap from using it.   If you read through some of the beginner tutorials the benefits will soon become self evident and due to Backbone.js light nature you can incrementally include it in any current or future projects.


h3. Relevant Links
* "Backbone.js official website":http://documentcloud.github.com/backbone/
* "great hackernews discussion /w post from author":http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=2119704


h3. Author

* "Thomas Davis":https://github.com/thomasdavis

h3. Contributors

* "FND":https://github.com/FND
