---
layout: post
title: What is a collection?
type: beginner
posturl: http://backbonetutorials.com/what-would-you-use-backbone
---

h1. In progress

h2. What is a collection?

p. Backbone collections are simply an ordered set of "models":/what-is-a-model.   Such that it can be used in situations such as;

* Model: Student, Collection: ClassStudents 
* Model: Todo Item, Collection: Todo List
* Model: Animals, Collection: Zoo

Typically your collection will only use one type of model but models themselves are not limited to a type of collection;

* Model: Student, Collection: Gym Class
* Model: Student, Collection: Art Class
* Model: Student, Collection: English Class

Here is a generic Model/Collection example.

{% highlight javascript %}

    var Song = Backbone.Model.extend({
        initialize: function(){
            console.log("Music is the answer");
        }
    });
    
    var Album = Backbone.Collection.extend({
		model: Song
	});

{% endhighlight %}

h3. Building a collection

p. Now we are going to populate a creation with some useful data.

{% highlight javascript %}

    var Song = Backbone.Model.extend({
		defaults: {
			name: "Not specified",
			artist: "Not specified"
		},
        initialize: function(){
            console.log("Music is the answer");
        }
    });
    
    var Album = Backbone.Collection.extend({
		model: Song
	});
	
	var song1 = new Song({ name: "How Bizarre", artist: "OMC" });
	var song2 = new Song({ name: "Sexual Healing", artist: "Marvin Gaye" });
	var song3 = new Song({ name: "Talk It Over In Bed", artist: "OMC" });
	
	var myAlbum = new Album([ song1, song2, song3]);
	console.log( myAlbum.models ); // [song1, song2, song3]
	
{% endhighlight %}

h3. So how does Backbone.js help?

p. Backbone is an incredibly small library for the amount of functionality and structure it gives you.   One can not easily summarize the benefits you will reap from using it.   If you read through some of the beginner tutorials the benefits will soon become self evident and due to Backbone.js light nature you can incrementally include it in any current or future projects.


h3. Relevant Links
* "Backbone.js official website":http://documentcloud.github.com/backbone/
* "great hackernews discussion /w post from author":http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=2119704


h3. Author

* "Thomas Davis":https://github.com/thomasdavis

h3. Contributors

* "FND":https://github.com/FND
